---
title: 'exporting my laravel blog to static pages.'
date: 2022-04-27
---
After developing this blog, I didn't feel like setting up a server for this. [I am not using a database](https://robinmartijn.nl/posts/2022-04-26-22-39-27-how-i-built-this-blog-without-a-single-database/) because I want to keep the architecture simple. Therefore, I decided to export my website to static HTML and CSS pages. After all: after writing a post, there is nothing dynamic about the website.

## Generating static pages with PHP
Generating a static page from a PHP script is very simple. You call your script from the CLI and store everything in an `.html` file. A child can do the job.

```bash
$ php index.php
```

Of course, it is important that you also include the assets: think CSS and possibly Javascript.

However, for my application, this is not sufficient. In fact, in a Laravel application, everything goes through the index.php. So you will have to create a request with all the relevant data for each page you have.

## Using `laravel-export`
For this purpose, [`laravel-export`](https://github.com/spatie/laravel-export) has been developed by Spatie.

Like most packages from `Spatie`, this one is very easy to use. Installation is done with `composer`.

```bash
$ composer require spatie/laravel-export
```

After this you have the possibility to publish the config file, if you want. Here you can set additional things, like running an `npm run prod` before exporting, or running a deployment hook after exporting. If you want, you can publish it with:

```bash
$ php artisan vendor:publish --provider=Spatie\\Export\\ExportServiceProvider
```

Once you have set what you wanted to set, you can run your export with:

```bash
$ php artisan export
```

By default, all files are placed in `dist/`. You can change this in the config file:

```php
// config/export.php

return [
    'disk' => 'export',
];
```

An advantage of this is that you can place your files directly on S3, for example. [You can then set this up to host your static website](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/WebsiteHosting.html). Another option is to put your files on a server directly via FTP, if you have a standard, boring web server. That's the case with me, so I'm going to set that up today.

## Setting up FTP for `laravel-export`
To export my files directly to my server with FTP, I need to set FTP as a filesystem in Laravel. In addition, I need to tell `laravel-export` that I want to use this FTP filesystem.

### Setting up the FTP filesystem
Let's start with the first thing: setting up the FTP filesystem. A good start is to just read the documentation on [Laravel's filesystems](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/filesystem#ftp-driver-configuration).

First, we need to install the Flysystem FTP package via the Composer package manager:

```bash
$ composer require league/flysystem-ftp "^3.0"
```

Then, we need to tell Laravel about the FTP filesystem. This is done by adding the `Ftp` driver to the `filesystems` array in the `config/filesystems.php` file:

```php
// config/filesystems.php

'disks' => [

    'ftp' => [
        'driver' => 'ftp',
        'host' => env('FTP_HOST'),
        'username' => env('FTP_USERNAME'),
        'password' => env('FTP_PASSWORD'),
        'root' => env('FTP_ROOT'),
    ],

    // Other disks
],
```

Of course, this also means that you need to set the FTP credentials in your `.env` file.

```
FTP_HOST=ftp.example.com
FTP_USERNAME=username
FTP_PASSWORD=password
FTP_ROOT=/path/to/root
```

That's it. Now, you can export your files to your FTP server.

### Exporting to FTP
Now, you can export your files to your FTP server. It's time to tell `laravel-export` to use the FTP filesystem.

```php
// config/export.php

'disk' => 'ftp',
```

And that's all. Now, you can export your files to your FTP server with a simple command:

```bash
$ php artisan export
```

The post you are currently reading, has been published while I was writing the blog itself.

Got any questions? Feel free to shoot me a message on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/RobinMartijn).